I am Marty Romero, and this is an interview with
Mrs. Travis Bryan in her home on the morning of
April 15, 1976. This is part of the Texas A&M Oral
History Program.
Because
it makes it so permanent. Oh, I know. Well, why
don't you go ahead and just tell me something about
yourself. I can erase a towel back if I don't want
to. It can be known publicly. Well, you asked me the
question. OK. Well, you might just start by
telling me a little bit about yourself, maybe how
old you are and how you got here. Well, I was born
here. My mother and father were Mr. and Ms. H.L.
Boatwright. And I was born in 1896, and I've lived
here all my life. And the only time I was gone was
when I was away in college. visits, of course, so
I've been right here almost 80 years. Oh, did you
meet your husband here? It's a wonderful
experience to live, I think, your life out in the
town where you were born. At least I have loved it. I
thought, of course, years ago that when I married,
maybe I'd move away, but as it turned out, I was so
happy that I did get to live here in my place, the
place of my birth. And, uh, It's just been
wonderful. I have made friends that have been here
forever, all my life. Oh, wow. That I've known all
my life, and I have loved every minute of it. Well,
neat. Did you have all your children here then? My
mother and father had two other children. I had a
sister and a brother, but I was the youngest one in
the family, the baby. And they were a little bit
older than I was. My sister was 12 years older than I
was, and my brother was... ten years older than I
was. And my mother and father lost a child, a
miscarriage, in between my brother and me. And so
that's why there was such a difference between
them and me. But it never did make any difference.
We were all such a happy family. And I don't know
anything in the world about children not wanting
to stay in their mother's and father's home. You
know, it's a style now to move out when you've got to
be about 16 or 17 years old. And we had such a happy
home. This is the house my mother and father built
when I was six years old. Oh, really? This is where I
grew up as a child, in this very house. And we moved
up here when I was six years old. And I got to be seven
soon after we moved here. And school was right
across the street. So the school bell would ring,
and I would just wait till it rang. Then I'd run out
the front door and run across the street and be on
time for school. And so it was very convenient. But
then when I got along up in the senior years at
school, my father was a Baptist deacon and very
active in the Baptist work, the Baptist church
here. And so he and some others went together and
built a Brown Baptist Academy. And it was a Baptist
school, a denominational school. And since my
family was such a devout Baptist, he wanted me to
leave the public school system go to the Baptist
school. So I did. So I did not graduate from the
Brown school. I graduated from the Baptist
Academy in high school. It was the same curriculum
and all, you know, same studies and everything,
but just different schools. So, and then I went to
Mary Harden Baylor College in Belkin. I was
majoring in music, voice and piano and pipe all of
them. My mother taught me pipe all of them. Oh. And
so I went to Mary Holland Baylor for two years at
Belton, Texas, and then I left to go to New York
City. I didn't graduate from Mary Holland Baylor.
I went on to New York City and studied there, music.
And I had graduated. I had two diplomas in music,
piano. And then, of course, the man I was supposed
to marry, going to marry, was in... France and
Germany in World War I, and so we had to delay our
marriage until he came back. So I didn't get
married until 1921, May 17th, 1921. And
we just had one son, he was Travis Brown Jr., and
he's at the vice chairman of the board of the First
National Vice. And he has two sons, so I have two
grandsons, Travis Brown III and Timothy Norman
Brown. Travis III is a lawyer, and the other one is
going to be a banker. And Travis III is going to come
into our new bank. We're building a new bank
building, the First National. And so the bank, of
course, needs a lawyer. And so he's going to have
his office and work in the First National Bank,
too. All my folks have been bankers, right there in
the First National Bank. My father was president
of the bank, and my husband was president, and my
son was president, and now he's chairman of the
board. My brother was in the bank, vice president.
And we just don't know anything about making a
living except in that First National Bank. And my
life mainly has been spent in this home and my
church. I was brought up to be a Christian. And my
mother and father were devout Christians. They
thought that the only way to be excused from going
to church was to either be sick or to have a death in
the family. And if someone died and was buried on
Saturday, we were in church on Sunday morning. And
so that's the kind of parents I had. My grandfather
was a Baptist minister, F.M. Law. And I grew up in a
strict home. I mean by that, They were not like so
many parents today. My mother and father were
here. When I came home from school, my mother was
here. And they knew where I was at all times. And
when I went out on a date at night, when I was growing
up and a young girl, I was supposed to be home by
midnight. And if I wasn't, they just took the town
to pieces looking for me. We didn't play cards. We
didn't drink. My father said he'd rather have a
dozen rattlesnakes turn loose in his house than to
have liquor in his home. We don't know anything
about drinking. I don't have any idea in the world
what to even call for if I wanted to drink. And it's
very repulsive to me to see it on television, all
these shows. They don't seem to get in the room, but
they all happen to have a drink. And so they were
faithful Baptists. members of the First Baptist
Church and they taught me to be too and so my life has
been taken up with my home and the First Baptist
Church working for the Lord. Of course that is the
most important thing for anybody but I was going on
to say so many young people can't even stay until
they're grown but I stayed seven years after I was
married in my mother's home. They were just so
grieved to think that I was getting married. They
were happy for me to marry, but they didn't want me
to leave home. So they had this grand big house.
There's 22 rooms and three stories. And they began
to beg my future husband to let us live in this
house. It's so big, and they were the only ones
going to be here because my brother and sister were
both young then. They were older, as I said, than I
was. So there would be just the four of us in this big
house. And my mother just cried. She said, oh,
please don't leave yet a while. Let me get used to
you being married. My father was the kind of person
that said that he would cut off both of his hands
before he would strike one of his children. And so
we didn't know anything about spankings or being
hit by our parents. We were just taught right from
wrong. We loved each other so that we did not want to
hurt our parents, and so we don't know anything
about disobeying and acting ugly and saying other
things to our parents. We just didn't know
anything about that. That wasn't done. In fact, I
cannot recall that there was ever an unkind word
spoken between my mother and father and the three
children. We all loved each other, devotedly, and
we just didn't know anything about fussing and
going on. My child was born, I was still living in my
mother's and father's home, and soon after he was
born and was several years old, I decided it was
time for us to have our own home. So my mother said,
well, do you want us to give you the walk down there
where we used to keep the cows and the horses?
Before we had an automobile, we had a very
beautiful Victorian carriage, and we drove two
black horses to it. And they had a leverage driver
to drive the carriage and the horses. And then all
of us, as we were growing up, had our own horse to
ride horse by. And we had such a happy home. And my
mother and father loved us, and we loved them. And
it was just a delight to come home. And this has been
such a happy home always. It still is. And my
husband and I, we hardly had a... We didn't have an
unkind word. We disagreed sometimes. He was a
member of the Presbyterian Church and I was
Baptist. Sometimes I'd tell him what I believed
about my religion and that it didn't quite agree
with his. And I'd say, now you know I'm right and
you're wrong. And he'd say, no, I'm right and
you're wrong. That's about the extent of our
disagreements. I don't know anything about
fussing or even arguing with people. I don't like
that. I don't think Christians are supposed to do
that. We are to be filled with the love of God and to
express that to everyone with whom we come in
contact. And our main work in this life is to win
long souls to Christ and to witness to long people.
And if you're going around fussing and acting ugly
and blessing people out and using bad words and all
such as that, your influence is ruined. And so we
didn't go to cocktail parties and Well, I never did
dance a step in my life. I don't know one cog from the
other. My daddy said that we had a boy growing up in
this house, and that it might be that if we all got to
play in cogs and all, that he would turn out to be a
gambler, because so many people do gamble with
cogs, pussycats, and so now they gamble with most
everything. And so it was strict in that sense, but
it was so full of love that you didn't mind the
strictness. You loved it. And I appreciated my
parents because they were doing it because they
loved me and because they wanted to keep me out of
the penitentiary and make me grow up to be a decent
human being and a Christian human being. And so I
praise the Lord every day. And as I grow older, I
appreciate more and more the fact that my mother
and father had certain rules. We honored them. We
knew when mealtimes was and we were here. We had
family worship. And we learned a verse of
scripture, a new verse of scripture every day. And
it's the evening hour right here in this dining
room. This is not the table. This was a table I
bought for my home. We all had family worship.
Everybody had come to the evening meal. And we all
quoted a new verse of scripture. And we just loved
it. We loved everybody. And really, I have never
spoken an unkind word to anybody in my life. Can you
believe it? One time... Oh, not too many years ago,
two women came to my home. It's when I was living
down here. My mother and father gave us that lot
right down there, as I said, where we kept the
horses and the cows. And they said, do you want to
build your new home down there? In the meantime,
they had sold the cows, and we had automobiles, of
course, and so we didn't need that for the horses
and cows anymore. And so we said, oh, yes, of course
we did. So the little house right down here, right
back at me in this same block is the home that my
husband and I built, my son and his wife built down
there. And so, what was I going to say? I forgot my
train of thought now.
Anyway, we moved down there in, I think, 1928. And
my sister died in 1927. She was the first of the
family to go. And then my father died in about seven
years. And then my mother was next in 1944. And I
lost my husband in 1964. And, of course, my
sister-in-law died and my brother-in-law died.
So I don't have any family now except my son and his
wife and their two children and the
great-grandson. And of course my grandson is
married, one of them is, and he has a wife and this
little baby who's three years old. So that's my
family. And
my other grandson works in a bank in Houston. He's
learning to be a banker, and when he has finished
the course in that Citizen's Life, the bank in
Houston, He's coming back here to work in Albany,
first master plan. It must be nice to have your
family all get back together. Yes. This town was
named for my husband's grandfather. And of
course, that makes us love it all the more. He
founded Brown. And Stephen F. Austin, his uncle,
was the founder of Texas, you know, the father of
Texas. And among the 300, he brought the 300, the
first settlers of Texas. The first 300, he was, of
course, the leader of them. So my husband's family
founded this town and makes us just love it all the
more, of course, and all the more interested in it.
And it's very strange that my grandfather, who was
a Baptist preacher, founded the town that my
husband was born in, which was Giddings. So we had
that to life about sometimes. And there's nothing
exciting or interesting about my life. No one
could possibly care anything about it because
it's been just very normal and down to earth and
nothing great to tell about. There have been a lot
of prominent people in this house. My
brother-in-law was a politician. And so he had
some very important politicians to come here.
William Jennings Brown, who was no kin to my
husband. But anyway, he was a teetotaler, you
know. He always turned his wine glass down when he
was invited to social functions. So when he came
here, he was a guest in our home one time, and... my
mother served grape juice, just plain, fermented
grape juice, just like we buy out of the bottle now,
you know. So he just loved it. She told me, she says,
don't be afraid to drink that. It's nothing in the
world but just plain grape juice. So he thanked
her, and he told her that from then on, every place
he went, when they were all serving liquor and
cocktails, he'd say, give me some grape juice. A
woman in Texas taught me to drink grape juice. But
mainly big Baptist preachers were entertained in
this home. It used to be when we had revival
meetings here. In those days, we entertained them
in our homes, the visiting preachers, you know.
And my mother and father thought that it was a very
wonderful thing, the influence for their home to
have these great preachers. George Turrett, I'm
sure you two youngs have heard of him, but he's
considered about the greatest Baptist preacher
that ever was. And he was pastor of that big church
in Dallas for so long. And he has been here so many
times. And so, as they say in the White House,
Lincoln slept here. So I can say that George Trude
and William Jennings Brown and Joe Bailey, who was
a big politician, and just all kinds of important
people like that used to come to visit us. But
mainly, my home was taken up with religion. And
most people in the world today don't care about
hearing. Not most of them. I won't say that. But so
many people are not interested in you. They don't
care about being with you. You know, a Christian is
supposed to be a unique person. A person who stands
out in the crowd. In fact, a person who does as the
Bible says, come ye out from among them and be this
separate. So my life, I'm sure, to most people is
very dull. and dry and uninteresting because so
many people are looking for worldly things and
people of the world, people who have made a name for
themselves in the world. I'm trying to live so that
when I go to heaven, I'll have a nice home to live in.
And I'm sewing on my wedding garment that I'm going
to wear to the marriage feast. And I do honestly
believe that the rapture is fast approaching. Of
course, the rapture is when the church is taken out
of the world. Every true believer is going to be
called up into the heavens, and that is called the
rapture. First of all, the dead in Christ are going
to be called out of their graves. And those loved
ones that you and I took to the cemetery, if they
were God's children, they're going to just come
right out of that grave. And they're going to be in
the body that they will put down there in. Only it's
going to be revived, of course. And they're going
to look like they did as we knew them. Only then they
will have a resurrected body, like we're getting
ready to observe Jesus' resurrected body this
coming Sunday. And then those of us who are on the
earth, still living and are saved by the blood of
Jesus Christ, we're going to talk life straight up
into the clouds and be at home with the Lord. And
then will be the marriage feast. And I'm working
today, and have been all my life since I learned to
be a Christian, I'm working on my wedding garment.
Everyone who is a Christian and goes to heaven, of
course they will go to heaven, they are saved, will
be given a white robe showing that they are saved
from their sins and that they are pure and white and
clean. But those of us who work for the Lord will be
given another garment called the toga, And it will
be beaded with diamonds and studded with rubies
and emeralds and sapphires and all kinds of
precious stones. And the more deeds I do for the
Lord and in His name, the more stones, the more
precious stones I'll have on my wedding garment.
And I don't crave those things for myself. I crave
them for the Lord because it will show When he puts
that garment on me, it will show that I have been
tried to be at least faithful to him and have served
him because I love him so. I don't count what he has
done for me and for my family.
He's given me perfect health. I've never been sick
to imagine in my entire life. In 1954, I was in the
grocery store one afternoon, and I had been
working in the yard all day, a loft of garden,
working the flowers. And my yellow man had gone,
and I ran by the grocery store to pick up some steaks
for my husband and me to have that night for dinner.
And one of my friends was standing there, and she
said, what's the matter with you? You're sick. I
said, well, I'm not sick. She said, well, you
certainly are. I said, well, what makes you think
so? I don't feel bad. I said, I've been wearing the
yellow all day long. She said, you're sick because
your eyes are swollen. And I said, oh, my goodness,
well, I didn't even know it. So I said to the man in
the market, I said, give me my state's right of
face. I've got to go to the doctor. So I got on my car
and flew out to the doctor's office. It's right as I
could to get there before he closed up. And I said,
my friend, Miss Parker, tells me that I'm sick. He
laughed. He said, she did? Well, what made her
think so? I said, well, she says my eyes are
swollen. And he looked at me and said, well, they
are. And he took my blood pressure and examined my
heart, you know, like they do. And he said, oh, I
don't think anything's serious. He said, maybe
it's just an allergy. So we piddled around. I went
back to him. He said, you come back in about a week
and let's see how they look in a week. So I went back.
And instead of getting better, they had gotten
worse. So after several visits with him, he said,
you know, I'm not really prepared yet. He was a baby
specialist. He said, I'm not really prepared to
make all the tests that you need to have made. So he
said, I think I'd better send you to the Ledbetter
Clinic in Houston. So he sat me down there, and it
took him four months to find what my trouble was
because I was so beastly healthy. And I had no
symptoms of anything being wrong with me except my
eyes were swollen, and my skin and my face began to
look a little funny. So finally, after the...
Eliminating all the other possible things that
might be wrong with me, Dr. Paul Labella down there
in Houston said, well, it's bound to be pure
gallbladder. And of course, he'd been taking all
kinds of pictures of it, and it did not show up in a
picture, so he decided that that was it, that it was
blocked with gallbladder stones. So my husband
and I went down to the Baptist Memorial Hospital in
1955, and on June the 15th that year, Dr. Aylors,
who was considered about the outstanding surgeon
in Houston, removed my gallbladder. It was
completely filled with stones. And so I sat up on
the bed, on the side of the bed the next day, and the
next day I was walking. Nothing has ever kept me in
bed any length of time. I've had a slight case of the
flu, I thanked twice, but I didn't go to bed. I would
just lie down more and take a nap in the afternoon.
And then I did have to have this major surgery. Then
I had to go back one time and have my tonsils taken
out, and my husband went with me then, and he said to
the doctor, he said she never has stopped singing,
she never has stopped talking, she never has
stopped laughing. And we got up the next morning
and went to Dallas for the weekend, and I ate shrimp
cocktails and just had a time of my life. So my
husband said to Dr. Lowe, who was the ER nose and
throat specialist in Houston, the one who removed
my tonsils, he said, I'm not going to pay you. You
didn't take them out. So the Lord has blessed me so.
And I had such a good time. You know, the girls all
used to laugh at me. in my crowd, because I didn't
dance, and I didn't drink, and I didn't play cards,
and I didn't gamble, and all that kind of thing. And
they said, well, you just might not have any fine
dollars. But you see, the Lord blesses us. The
closer we live to Him, and the more we try to please
Him and serve Him, the more He's going to bless us.
So I had plenty of boyfriends. I used to go with the
Aggies. I went with the A&M professors. I had a
chance to marry a good many of them. No. head
football coach at A&M wanted to marry me. He came to
New York to see me when I was up there and tried to beg
me to marry him up there. And I had a gloriously
happy time. Not because there was anything about
me. I wasn't any different from any other girl. In
fact, some of them were a lot better looking than I
was, more attractive every way than I was. I was
just a plain, ordinary girl. It was the Lord.
showing me that you did not have to be a worldly
person to have a good time. And the closer I have
found all my life, the closer I live to him, the more
the blessings flow to him. The other day I noticed
that my feet were swollen. And I thought, oh, no, I
certainly don't have an inch of strength to go to
the hospital and go through the clinic. I just
thought it would kill me. And so I thought, well, I
have a Heavenly Father who knows exactly what's
the matter with me. I'll ask him. So I said, Oh, dear
Heavenly Father, please tell me. I'm going to
close my eyes and I'm going to ask you, Lord, to open
the Bible when you want me to see the answer and tell
me if I'm sick, if I need to go to the hospital. Of
course, I will if I have to. So this is the way I pray
when I want a fast answer. So I closed my eyes and I
picked up my Bible and I said, Now, Father, please
open it to the verse you want me to see. So I opened
it, and this is the verse. My eyes fell right on that
verse. Thy faith hath made thee whole, go in peace.
And I said, oh, thank you, Lord. Praise your holy
name. I don't have to go to the hospital. And in just
a very few minutes' time, he said to me, you're
eating too much fermented cheese. You know, I
don't like to cook anymore. My husband's not here,
and I'm by myself, and I have arthritis. I don't
feel like cooking anymore. So I'd been eating too
many pomada cheese sandwiches. He let my feet
swell to call my attention to the fact that I was
doing something wrong. So he told me what it was. So
I quit eating pomada cheese, and the swelling was
gone the next day. Then when I went to Houston to
have that gallbladder operation, my husband's
face was as long as from here to college. He just
knew I was going to die because I never had been
sick. And so he put me in that Memorial Hospital
down there. And that night, before surgery, he had
gone on over to the hotel to go to bed in his room to be
back for my surgery. So I said, now, Father, talk to
the Lord. I said, I know you know whether I'm going
to live or die. And I said, I'm ready to go to heaven
any time you want me to. I don't mind dying tomorrow
morning. And I'm ready to die. But I said, I
certainly would like to know. My husband is so sad.
He's just worried to death. Is there anything you
could tell me that would cheer him up a little bit?
And I said, now I'm going to take the Bible and let
you open it with my hands and tell me what's going to
happen to me during this operation. So this is the
truth that I ever told him. He opened the Lord,
opened my Bible. My eyes fell on this verse. The
sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of
God. That the name of the Son of God might be
glorified. So I'm the happiest person here. I
wanted to get out on the floor and kiss it because
the Lord was in there and I was just shouting all
night. And a little while, the nurse took a hand in
the door and she said, it's time for me to give you a
pill to make you go to sleep. I said, no. She said, I
see you're nervous. You're scared because you
won't go to sleep. I said, no, I'm not scared at all.
I said, please don't come in the room. I said, God is
in here and I'm visiting with him. And I'm not going
to take a pill. And I'm not scared. And I'm not going
to die. And I know I'm not going to die because God
has told me to. And so I said, if you will, please
don't come in right now. I don't want to interrupt
my visit with the Lord. Then one time I... I had to go
to the dentist. I had an infected tooth. And the
doctor said, well, you just have to put it. That's
all. So he pulled my tooth, and it was way back in the
back of my mouth. He said, Ms. Brown, I'm awfully
worried about this. He says, it's badly infected,
and I'm so afraid the poison is going to go to your
brain. I said, oh, Dr. Ritchie, I don't think it
will. I said, I'm healthy. Nothing ever happens to
me. It was Saturday, and so I said, I've got to hurry
on home and Studied my science school last year. So
I came out. He said, well, you come back in a week. I
said, all right. So I came out home and just almost
forgot about it. But when the next Saturday came, I
remembered I had an appointment with him. So I went
back and he said, well, you see, he x-rayed it. He
said, the poison has gone to your head. And he said,
oh, Ms. Brown, he said, it's dangerous. He said,
you've got to go to the doctor right now. He had an
open throat now immediately. I said, well,
doctor.